Interpretable agent communication from scratch
(with a generic visual processor emerging on the side)

Roberto Dessì
Facebook AI Research
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
rdessi@fb.com

Eugene Kharitonov
Facebook AI Research
kharitonov@fb.com

Marco Baroni
Facebook AI Research
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
ICREA
mbaroni@fb.com

Abstract
As deep networks begin to be deployed as autonomous agents, the issue of how
they can communicate with each other becomes important. Here, we train two
deep nets from scratch to perform large-scale referent identification through unsupervised emergent communication. We show that the partially interpretable
emergent protocol allows the nets to successfully communicate even about object
classes they did not see at training time. The visual representations induced as
a by-product of our training regime, moreover, when re-used as generic visual
features, show comparable quality to a recent self-supervised learning model. Our
results provide concrete evidence of the viability of (interpretable) emergent deep
net communication in a more realistic scenario than previously considered, as
well as establishing an intriguing link between this field and self-supervised visual
learning. 1

1

Introduction

As deep networks become more effective at solving specialized tasks, there has been interest in letting
them develop a language-like communication protocol so that they can flexibly interact to address
joint tasks [1]. One line of work within this tradition has focused on what is arguably the most basic
function of language, namely to point out, or refer to, objects through discrete symbols. Such ability
would for example allow deep-net-controlled agents, such as self-driving cars, to inform each other
about the presence and nature of potentially dangerous objects, besides being a basic requirement to
support more advanced capabilities (e.g., denoting relations between objects).
While discreteness is not a necessary prerequisite for agent communication [2, 3], practical and ethical
problems might arise if communication is incomprehensible to humans. A discrete code analogous
to language is certainly easier to decode for us, helping us to understand the agents’ decisions, and
ultimately contributing to the larger goal of explainable AI [4].
In this paper, we study emergent discrete referential communication between two deep network
agents that are trained from scratch on the task. We observe that the referential discrimination task
played by the networks is closely related to pretext contrastive objectives used in self-supervised
visual representation learning [5–8]. We exploit this insight to develop a robust end-to-end variant of a
communication game. Our experiments confirm that, in our setup: i) the nets develop a set of discrete
symbols allowing them to successfully discriminate objects in natural images, including novel ones
that were not shown during training; ii) these symbols denote partially interpretable categories, so
that their emergence can be seen as a first step towards fully unsupervised image annotation; iii) the
visual representations induced as a by-product can be used as high-quality general-purpose features,
1

Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/EGG/tree/master/egg/zoo/emcom_as_ssl.

35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

whose performance in various object classification tasks is not lagging much behind that of features
induced by a popular self-supervised representation method specifically designed for this task.

2

Background

Deep net emergent communication There has recently been interest in letting deep nets communicate through learned protocols. This line of work has addressed various challenges, such as
communication in a dynamic environment or how to interface the emergent protocol with natural
language (see [1] for a survey). Probably the most widely studied aspect of emergent communication
is the ability of deep net agents to use the protocol to refer to objects in their environment [e.g., 9–16].
The typical setup is that of a referential, or discriminative, communication game. In the simplest
scenario, which we adopt here, an agent, the Sender, sees one input (the target) and it sends a discrete
symbol to another agent, the Receiver, that sees an array of items including the target, and has to
point to the latter for communication to be deemed successful. Importantly, task success is the only
training objective; the communication protocol emerges purely as a by-product of game-playing,
without any direct supervision on the symbol-transmission channel.
In one of the earliest papers in this line of research, Lazaridou et al. [9] used images from ImageNet
[17] as input to the discrimination game; Havrylov and Titov [11] used MSCOCO [18]; and Evtimova
et al. [12] used animal images from Flickr. While they relied on natural images, all these studies
were limited to small sets of carefully selected object categories. Moreover, in all these works, the
agents processed images with convolutional networks pretrained on supervised object recognition.
While this sped up learning, it also meant that all the proposed systems de facto relied on the large
amount of human annotated data used for object recognition training. Lazaridou et al. [13] and Choi
et al. [14] dispensed with pre-trained CNNs, but they used synthetically generated geometric shapes
as inputs.
Results on the interpretability of symbols in games with realistic inputs have generally been mixed.
Indeed, Bouchacourt and Baroni [19] showed that, after training Lazaridou et al. [9]’s networks on
real pictures, the networks could use the learned protocol to successfully communicate about blobs
of Gaussian noise, suggesting that their code (also) denoted low-level image features, differently
from the general semantic categories that words in human language refer to. In part for this reason,
recent work tends to focus on controlled symbolic inputs, where it is easier to detect degenerate
communication strategies [e.g., 10, 15, 16].
Learning discrete latent representations with variational autoencoders Like emergent communication, variational autoencoders and related techniques have been used to induce discrete variables
without direct supervision [20–22]. There are however important differences stemming from the fact
that this research line is interested in inducing latent representations to be used in tasks such as image
generation, whereas the goal of emergent communication is to induce discrete symbols for inter-agent
coordination. As a result, for example, discrete representations derived with variational autoencoders
are typically of much higher dimensionality, making a direct comparison in terms of interpretability
difficult. Still, it is remarkable that the goal of learning discrete representations in an unsupervised
way independently arose in different fields, and future work should explore connections between
these ideas.
Self-supervised representation learning Self-supervised learning of general-purpose visual features has received much attention in recent years. The main idea is to train a network on a pretext task
that does not require manual annotation. After convergence, the net is used to extract high-quality
features from images, to be applied in various “downstream” tasks of interest. This is often done by
training a simple classifier on top of the frozen trained architecture [23–26].
Early models used image-patch prediction as the proxy task [8, 27]. Recent work has instead focused
on an instance-level contrastive discrimination objective [5–7, 28]. Two symmetric networks encode
different views of the same input images obtained through a stochastic data augmentation pipeline.
Optimization is done with variants of the InfoNCE loss [27, 29], that maximizes similarity among
representations of the same image while minimizing similarity of different ones.
Interestingly, the contrastive pretext task is very close to the one of identifying a target image
among distractors, as in the standard emergent communication referent discrimination game. The
2

Figure 1: Game setup and agent architectures. Image sources: https://unsplash.com
influential SimCLR model proposed by Chen et al. [5] is particularly similar to our setup. It uses
two twin networks with a shared convolutional module optimizing the (dis)similarity of sets of
target/distractor images. The main conceptual differences are that there is no discrete bottleneck
imposed on “communication” between the networks, and there is no asymmetry, so that both networks
act simultaneously as Sender and Receiver (both networks produce a continuous “message” that must
be as discriminative for the other network as possible).
We rely here on the connection with self-supervised learning in two ways. First, we import the idea
of data augmentation from this literature into the communication game, showing how it helps in
evolving a more semantically interpretable protocol. Second, we evaluate the discrimination game as
a self-supervised feature extraction method. We find that the visual features induced by the CNNs
embedded in our agents are virtually as good as those induced by SimCLR, while the emergent
protocol is better for communication than the one obtained by adapting SimCLR to the discrete
communication setup.

3

Setup

3.1

The discrimination game

A Sender network receives as input a target picture, and it produces as output one of |V | symbols. A
Receiver network receives in input this symbol, as well as a list of n pictures, one of them (randomly
placed in the ith position of the list) being the same target presented to the Sender. Receiver
produces a probability distribution of cardinality n, interpreted as its guess over the position of the
target. The guess is correct iff Receiver concentrates the largest probability mass on the ith position,
corresponding to the target slot.
Agent architecture Agent architecture and game flow are schematically shown in Fig. 1. Sender
reads the target image through a convolutional module, followed by a one-layer network mapping
the output of the CNN onto |V | dimensions and applying batch normalization [30], to obtain vector
v. Following common practice when optimizing through discrete bottlenecks, we then compute the
Gumbel-Softmax continuous relaxation [31, 32], which was shown to also be effective in the emergent
communication setup [11]. At train time, Sender produces an approximation to a one-hot symbol
[(si +vi )/τ ]
vector with each component given by mi = Pexp
, where si is a random sample from
j exp [(sj +vj )/τ ]
Gumbel(0,1) and vi a dimension of v. The approximation is controlled by temperature parameter τ :
as τ approaches 0, the approximation approaches a one-hot vector, and as τ approaches +∞, the
relaxation becomes closer to uniform. Importantly, at test time the Sender’s output is generated by
directly argmax-ing v, so that it is a discrete one-hot vector indexing one of |V | possible symbols.
Receiver passes each input image through its visual module (a CNN architecture), followed by
a two-layer MLP with batch normalization and ReLU after the first layer [33]. It then computes
temperature-weighted cosine scores for the linearly embedded symbol compared to each image
3

representation. The resulting vector of cross-modal (symbol-image) similarities is transformed into a
probability distribution over which image is the likely target by applying the softmax operation.
For both Sender and Receiver, we use ResNet-50 [34] as visual module. As they are different agents,
that could (in future experiments) have very different architectures and interact with further agents,
the most natural assumption is that each of them does visual processing with its own CNN (no weight
sharing). We consider however also a setup in which the CNN module is shared (closer to earlier
emergent-communication work, where the agents relied on the same pre-trained CNN).
Optimization Optimization is performed end-to-end and the error signal, backpropagated through
Receiver and Sender, is computed using the cross-entropy cost function by comparing the Receiver’s
output with a one-hot vector representing the position of the target in the image list.
SimCLR as a comparison model Given the similarity between the referential communication
game and contrastive self-supervised learning in SimCLR [5], we use the latter as a comparison
point for our approach. Fig. 2 schematically shows the SimCLR architecture. The crucial differences
between SimCLR and our communication game are the following: i) In SimCLR, the agents are
parameterized by the same network, that is, the visual encoder and transformation modules in the two
branches of Fig. 2 are instances of the same net. ii) The setup is fully symmetric. Like our Receiver,
both agents get a set of images in input, and, like our Sender, both agents can be seen as producing
“messages” representing each input image. iii) Instead of (a probability distribution over) symbols,
the exchanged information takes the form of continuous vectors (s in the figure). iv) The loss is
based on directly comparing embeddings of these continuous vectors (z in the figure), maximizing
the similarity between pairs representing the same images (positive examples in contrastive-loss
terminology) and minimizing that of pairs representing different images (negative examples). This
differs from our loss, that maximizes the similarity of the Receiver embedding of the Sender-produced
discrete symbol with its own representation of the target image, while minimizing the similarity of
the symbol embedding with its representation of the distractors.
It is important to stress the different roles that SimCLR as a comparison model will play in the
experiments below. When playing the communication game (Section 4.1), our discretized SimCLR method must be simply seen as an interesting baseline, as the system was not designed for
discrete communication in the first place (it is indeed interesting that it performs as well as it does).
When performing protocol analysis (Section 4.2), the discrete clusters explicitly built on SimCLR
representations act as a challenging comparison point for the categories implicitly induced by our
system through game playing. Finally, when evaluating the visual features learnt by the two systems
(Section 4.3), the roles are inverted, with SimCLR being a standard method developed for these
purposes, whereas in our setup the emergence of good visual representations is a by-product of
communication-based model training.

Figure 2: The SimCLR architecture. aug_p and aug_q are outputs of the stochastic augmentation
pipeline used to generate two views of the same image.
Data augmentation In the original discrimination game proposed in [9], the agents are shown
exactly the same target image.2 In self-supervised learning, on the other hand, it is common practice
to “augment” images in different ways, e.g., by applying different croppings or color perturbations
2
Lazaridou and colleagues [9] also considered a variant of the game in which the agents see different pictures
of the same category (e.g., the shared target is dog, but the agents get different dog pictures). This version of the
game is however severely limited by the requirement of manual category annotation. Lazaridou et al. [13] also
provide different images to Sender and Receiver, by feeding them different viewpoints of the same synthetically
generated objects: again, a strategy that will not scale up to natural images.

4

[5, 35, 36]. In standard contrastive learning frameworks, where all the weights are shared and there is
no communication bottleneck, it is necessary to create these different views, or else the system would
trivially succeed at the pretext contrastive task without any actual feature learning. We conjecture
that data augmentation, while not strictly needed, might also be beneficial in the communication
game setup: presenting different views of the target to Sender and Receiver should make it harder for
them to adopt degenerate strategies based on low-level image information [19]. We follow the same
data augmentation pipeline as [5], stochastically applying crop-and-resize, color perturbation, and
random Gaussian blurring to every image. Note that, for the experiments reported in the main paper,
we do not apply data augmentation at test time. Results with augmentation also applied at test time
are reported in Appendix A.4.
Implementation details All hidden and output layers are set to dimensionality 2048.3 Note that
this implies |V | = 2048, more than double the categories in the dataset we use to train the model (see
Section 3.2 below), to avoid implicit supervision on optimal symbol count.4 We fix Gumbel-Softmax
temperature at 5.0, and Receiver cosine temperature at 0.1. The latter value is also used for the
equivalent τ parameter in the NTXent-loss of our SimCLR implementation.
We train with mixed precision [37] for 100 epochs, with a batch of size 16 × 128 = 2048, divided
across 16 GPUs. Rather than sampling distractors from the entire dataset, we take them from the
current device’s batch, thus playing the communication game with 127 distractor images in all
reported experiments.5 We do not share distractors (negative samples) across devices. As in SimCLR,
we use the LARS optimizer [38] with linear scaling [39], resulting in an initial learning rate of 2.4.
We apply a cosine decay schedule without warmup nor restart [40]. Compute requirements are
reported in Appendix A.1. All models are implemented with the EGG toolkit [41].
3.2

Data

Referential game Training targets and distractors are sampled from the ILSVRC-2012 training set
[42], containing 1.3M natural images from 1K distinct categories. We use two image sources for
testing. First, we use the ILSVRC-2012 validation set, containing around 50K images from the same
categories as the training data. Second, in order to probe the generality of the emergent protocol, we
introduce a new “out-of-distribution” dataset (henceforth, the OOD set). To build the latter, we relied
on the whole ImageNet database [17], exploiting its WordNet-derived hierarchy [43]. In particular,
we randomly picked (and manually sanity-checked) 80 categories that were neither in ILSVRC-2012
nor hypernyms or hyponyms of ILSVR-2012 categories (e.g., since hamster is in ILSVRC-2012, we
avoided both rodent and golden hamster). We also attempted to sample categories of comparable
degree of generality to those in ILSVRC-2012. For each of the categories chosen according to these
criteria, we randomly sampled 128 images from ImageNet. Examples of included categories are
eucalyptus, yellowtail, and drawer. The OOD set categories are not tremendously different from the
ones in ILSVRC-2012, belonging to similar high-level domains, such as plants, fish and furniture.
This is on purpose. As our agents are limited to single-symbol communication, we do not expect
them to be able to denote completely unrelated test categories by compositional means. Rather, the
function of the OOD set is to check that the symbols of an emergent protocol do not overfit the very
specific classes of the training set, but are general enough to be usable for somewhat related categories
(e.g., that symbols developed for other training-set fish categories can also denote yellowtail).6
Linear evaluation of visual features on downstream tasks Following standard practice in selfsupervised learning [e.g., 5, 23, 44], we evaluate the visual features induced by the CNN components
of our models by training a linear object classifier on top of them. We use four common data sets:
3
This is the same size used in the original SimCLR paper, except for the nonlinear projection head. For the
latter, a number of sizes were tested, and the authors report that they do not impact final performance. We use
2048 for direct comparability with our setting.
4
Results with different vocabulary sizes are reported in Appendix A.6
5
Results with different numbers of distractors are reported in Appendix A.5.
6
Paths to the ImageNet images in the OOD set and the corresponding categories are available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/EGG/blob/master/egg/zoo/emcom_as_ssl/OOD_set.txt.

5

ILSVRC-2012, Places205 [45], iNaturalist2018 and VOC07.7 Evaluation is carried out with the
VISSL toolkit [46],8 adopting the hyperparameters in its configuration files without changes.

4

Experiments

4.1

Referential communication accuracy

We start by analyzing how well our models learn to refer to object-depicting images through a learned
protocol.9 As an interesting baseline, we let the trained SimCLR model play the referential game by
argmax-ing its s layer into a discrete “symbol” (SimCLRdisc ). By looking at the SimCLR diagram
in Fig. 2, it should be clear that s constitutes the equivalent of the communication layer, with z
functioning as symbol embedding layer. Discretizing h, in any case, led to lower game-playing
performance.10
Accuracy is given by the proportion of times in which the Receiver “picks the right image”, that is, it
assigns the largest symbol-embedding/image-representation similarity to the target compared to 127
distractors (chance ≈ 0.8%).
Results are in Table 1. The ILSVRC-val column shows that all models can play the game well above
chance when tested on new images of the same categories encountered during training. The next
column (OOD set) shows that the models also play the game well above chance with input images
from new categories, although mostly with a drop in performance. All variants of our model are
considerably more robust than the SimCLR baseline (which, however, does remarkably well at this
discrete communication game it was not designed for).

SimCLRdisc
Communication Game
-augmentations -shared
-augmentations +shared
+augmentations -shared
+augmentations +shared

ILSVRC-val
56.9%

OOD set
47.4%

Gaussian Blobs
0.8%

91.2%
92.8%
81.5%
82.2%

90.8%
92.7%
72.0%
73.7%

43.4%
84.7%
0.8%
0.8%

Table 1: Game-playing accuracy. ± augmentations marks whether the game was trained with data
augmentations or not. ± shared indicates whether there was CNN weight sharing or not between
Sender and Receiver.
Looking at model variants, sharing CNN weights or not makes little difference (an encouraging first
step towards communication between widely differing agents, that will obviously not be able to share
weights). On the other hand, data augmentations apparently harm performance. However, it turns out
that the better performance of the non-augmented models is due to an opaque communication strategy
in which the agents are referring to low-level aspects of images (perhaps, specific pixel intensity
levels?), and not to the high-level semantic information they contain (ideally, object categories).
To show this, we replicated the sanity check from [19]. We freeze the trained models and let them
play the communication game with blobs of Gaussian noise as targets and distractors. We use 384
batches of 128 224x224-sized random images whose pixels are drawn from the standard Gaussian
distribution N (0, 1), for a total of 49152 items (a size comparable to that of ILSVRC-val). Results
are in the last column of Table 1. The +augmentations models and SimCLR fully pass the sanity
check, with performance exactly at the 0.8% chance level. The -augmentation models, on the other
7
http://places.csail.mit.edu/index.html, https://www.kaggle.com/c/inaturalist-2018,
http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2007/
8
https://vissl.ai/
9
Appendix A.2 reports this and all following experiments repeated with 5 distinct initializations of our most
representative model (+augmentations -shared). It shows that variance across runs is negligible. We did not
repeat the check for the remaining models due to time and resource constraints (see Appendix A.1).
10
We also compared to an architecture from earlier work in emergent communication with realistic visual
inputs, that is, the one of [9, 19]. However, as shown in Appendix A.3, its performance is considerably lower
than that of SimCLRdisc .

6

hand, are able to use the symbols they learned from sane input to communicate about the Gaussian
blobs, showing that they developed an opaque protocol. The -augmentations +shared model, in
particular, is hardly affected by the switch to noise data.
4.2

Protocol analysis: emergent communication as unsupervised image annotation

The Gaussian blob test suggests that the +augmentations models do not fall into the trap of a
degenerate low-level protocol. However, it is not sufficient to conclude that they learned to associate
symbols with human-meaningful referents. To test whether this is the case, we exploit the fact that,
as we are working with ImageNet data, we have labels denoting the objects depicted in the images.
We use this information in two ways. We compute the normalized mutual information (nMI) between
the ground-truth labels of target images and the symbols produced for the same images by the trained
Sender. The nMI of two variables is obtained by dividing their MI by their average entropy, and it
ranges between 0 and 1. We also compute a normalized similarity measure based on the shortest path
between two categories in the WordNet is-a taxonomy. Our WNsim score is the average shortest-path
similarity of the ground-truth categories of all target pairs that share the same Sender symbol, and it
also ranges between 0 and 1. WNSim is more nuanced than nMI, as it will penalize less a Sender
using the same symbol for similar categories (e.g., cats and dogs) than one using the same symbol for
dissimilar ones (cats and skyscrapers). WNsim is computed with NLTK [47].11
We again take SimCLRdisc as a comparison point, where a “symbol” is simply the dimension with
the largest value on a certain layer. To give this approach its best chance, we evaluated the h, s and z
layers (see Fig. 2), and report statistics for h (CNN output), as it produced the best overall scores
across data sets. We also run k-means clustering on the h layer (SimCLRkmeans ). Cluster centroids
were estimated on a random 10% of the training set, and then used to group the test images into
clusters (treated as equivalents to the symbols produced by our systems). We tried clustering with
k = 1000 (ground-truth class cardinality) and k = 2048 (same as vocabulary size of our models).
We report the significantly better results we obtained with the second choice.

SimCLRdisc
SimCLRkmeans

|P |
1489
2035

Communication Game
-augmentations -shared
-augmentations +shared
+augmentations -shared
+augmentations +shared

2044
2048
2042
2046

ILSVRC-val
nMI WNsim
0.49
0.11
0.59
0.18
0.50
NS
0.58
0.56

0.08
NS
0.18
0.15

|P |
1069
1519

OOD set
nMI WNsim
0.46
0.19
0.54
0.30

1921
2025
1752
1765

0.45
NS
0.53
0.51

0.11
NS
0.32
0.25

Table 2: Protocol analysis. |P| is the observed protocol size, that is, the number of distinct symbols
actually used at test time. We mark as NS the cases where the obtained scores were not significantly
different from chance according to a permutation test with α = 0.01.
Looking at Table 2, we first observe that, consistent with the Gaussian blob sanity check, there is
no significant sign of symbol-category association for the -augmentations +shared protocol. All
other models show some degree of symbol interpretability (with significantly above-chance nMI and
WNsim scores). Even when there is no data augmentation during training, using different visual
modules (-augmentations -shared) leads to some protocol interpretability, coherently with the fact
that this configuration was less able than its +shared counterpart to communicate about noise. We
were moreover surprised to find that simply argmaxing the SimCLR visual feature layer produces
meaningful “symbols”, which suggests that information might be more sparsely encoded by this
model than one could naively assume.
Importantly, the game protocols derived with data augmentation have particularly high nMI and
WNsim scores. Impressively, the scores achieved by our models, and the +augmentations -shared
setup in particular, are very close to those obtained by clustering SimCLR visual features. Recall
that, unlike our models, whose protocol independently emerges during discriminative game training,
SimCLRkmeans runs a clustering algorithm on top of the representations produced by the SimCLR
11

Appendix A.7 further reports an analysis of symbol frequency distributions for representative models.

7

Figure 3: Randomly selected ILSVRC-val images triggering the +augmentations -shared Sender to
produce its 9 most frequent symbols.

Figure 4: Randomly selected OOD set images triggering the +augmentations -shared Sender to
produce the 3 most frequent ILSVRC-val symbols (cf. Fig. 3).

visual encoder with the express goal to discretize them into coherent sets, thus constituting a hard
competitor to reach.
Beyond the quantitative results, a sense of how good our symbols are as unsupervised image labels
can be gauged by qualitatively inspecting images sharing the same assigned symbol. Fig. 3 shows
a random set of such images for the 9 symbols most frequently produced by the +augmentations
-shared Sender in ILSVRC-val, without hand-picking.12 Some symbols denote intuitive categories,
although, interestingly, ones that do not correspond to specific English words (birds on branches,
dogs indoors. . . ). Other sets are harder to characterize, but they still share a clear high-level “family
resemblance” (Symbol 2: objects that glow in the dark; Symbol 3: human artifacts with simple flat
shapes, etc). Frequency imbalance in input super-categories, together with the fact that the agents are
allowed to use a large number of symbols, leads to partially overlapping clusters (Symbol 9 might
denote living things in the grass, whereas Symbol 4 seems to specifically refer to mammals in the
grass).
The fact that symbols do not exactly denote ILSVRC categories plays to the agents’ advantage
when they must communicate about OOD images. While this set, by construction, does not contain
ILSVRC categories, as Fig. 4 shows, it still contains birds on tree, glowing objects and artifacts with
12

We excluded 25% of symbol-5 images before sampling, as they depicted people. Consistent with this
symbol’s “theme”, the latter mostly show people with dark backgrounds.

8

Supervised
SimCLR
Communication Game
+augmentations -shared
+augmentations +shared

ILSVRC-val
76.5%
60.6%

Places205
53.2%
49.0%

iNaturalist2018
46.7%
31.8%

VOC07
87.5%
78.7%

59.0%
60.2%

47.9%
49.1%

30.8%
31.3%

77.0%
78.8%

Table 3: Linear evaluation on object classification. Reported scores are mAP for VOC07, top-1
accuracy elsewhere. Supervised results are from [24].
flat shapes, so that the agents can successfully refer to them by using the “spurious” but interpretable
symbols denoting these concepts that they induced from ILSVRC.
4.3

Downstream object classification: emergent communication as self-supervised visual
feature learning

Finally, we evaluate the features produced by the Sender CNN trained on the communication game as
out-of-the-box visual representations. We follow the standard protocol for training a linear classifier
on the output of the frozen CNN trunk on various object classification data sets (see Section 3.2
above). We focus on Sender because the features produced by the two agent networks are always
highly correlated.13 We further exclude the -augmentations models that, having learned a degenerate
strategy, reach extremely poor classification performance on ILSVRC-val (below 5% accuracy).
As a reasonable upper bound, Table 3 reports the fully-supervised object classification results
from [24]. As a more direct point of comparison, we also report the performance of our SimCLR
implementation.14 The table shows that the features developed as a by-product of the communication
game are of comparable quality to those of SimCLR, a method developed specifically for visual feature
learning. This is an extremely promising first step towards employing emergent communication as a
form of self supervision. Many ideas from the self-supervised literature (e.g., new data augmentation
pipelines, the use of memory banks for distractor sampling or variants of the similarity-based pretext
task) could straightforwardly be integrated into our setup, hopefully leading to the emergence of even
better visual features and, perhaps, an even more transparent protocol.

5

Conclusion

Deep agent coordination through communication has recently attracted considerable interest. Referential games are a natural environment to test the agents’ emergent communication strategies.
Past approaches, however, relied on relatively small image pools processed with pretrained visual
networks, or on artificial input. We showed here that deep agents can learn to refer to a high number
of categories depicted in large-scale image datasets, while communicating through a discrete channel
and developing their visual processing modules from scratch. Performance on referential games with
two distinct test sets (one with categories not presented at training), along with protocol analysis,
shows that the agents’ protocol is effective and partially interpretable.
A key ingredient to success was input data augmentation. We borrowed this idea from recent
approaches to self-supervised visual learning. Conversely, we showed how the agents’ visual
networks emerging from discriminative game playing produce high-quality visual features. Further
integration of emergent communication and self-supervised learning methods should be explored in
the future.
Our work constitutes just a small step in the right direction, and has important limitations to be
addressed in future work. Our agents communicate through a single symbol, but the true expressive
13
Across setups and data sets, the Sender/Receiver correlation between all pairwise visual representation
similarities was never below 0.96.
14
It is difficult to compare our SimCLR ILSVRC-val performance precisely to that reported in the original
paper since, coherently with the communication game setup, we use a per-GPU batch size of 128 without sharing
negatives across GPUs. By looking at the leftmost bars of Fig. 9 in [5], we note that the performance we report
is within the range of their results for the same number of training epochs (100).

9

power of human language comes from the infinite combinatorial possibilities offered by composing
sequences of discrete units [48]. Allowing longer messages and probing whether this results in the
development of a compositional code is our next priority. Additionally, while in our experiments
distractors are selected at random, this is obviously not the case in real-life referential settings
(dogs will tend to occur near other dogs or humans, rather than between a whale and a space
shuttle). Dealing with realistic category co-occurrence is thus another important future direction.
Finally, although we argued that a discrete protocol should be more interpretable than a continuous
one, and we provided preliminary quantitative and qualitative evidence that the agents’ protocol is
indeed reasonably transparent, whether the achieved degree of interpretability is good enough for
human-in-the-loop scenarios remains to be experimentally investigated.
Much recent work in the field has moved towards a theoretically-oriented understanding of deep agent
communication in symbolic and artificial setups. We went back instead to the original motivation
behind the study of emergent language, as a path towards the development of autonomous AIs
that can interact with each other in a realistic environment. While we are still far from real-lifedeployable interpretable machine-machine interaction, we hope that our work will stimulate more
studies pursuing this ambitious goal.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the NeurIPS area chair and reviewers, as well as Gemma Boleda, Rahma
Chaabouni, Emmanuel Chemla, Simone Conia and Lucas Weber for feedback; Priya Goyal for
technical support with VISSL; Mathilde Caron and the participants in the EViL meeting, the FAIR
EMEA-NLP meetup and the Trento/Amsterdam/Barcelona (TAB) meeting for fruitful discussions.
We also want to thank Jade Copet for sharing an early version of the code used in this work.

Funding transparency statement
The authors did not receive any form of third-party funding or support. They do not have any financial
relationship with entities that could be considered broadly relevant to the work, except those declared
in their affiliations.

References
[1] Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep
learning era. https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.02419, 2020.
[2] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning multiagent communication
with backpropagation. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 2244–2252, Barcelona, Spain, 2016.
[3] Nur Geffen Lan, Emmanuel Chemla, and Shane Steinert-Threlkeld. On the Spontaneous
Emergence of Discrete and Compositional Signals. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4794–4800, Online, July 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[4] Ning Xie, Gabrielle Ras, Marcel van Gerven, and Derek Doran. Explainable deep learning: A
field guide for the uninitiated. https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14545, 2020.
[5] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh,
editors, Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1597–1607. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
[6] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.
[7] Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
Bilal Piot, koray kavukcuoglu, Remi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent 10

a new approach to self-supervised learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F.
Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
pages 21271–21284. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[8] Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A. Efros. Unsupervised visual representation learning
by context prediction. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 1422–1430, 2015.
[9] Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation
and the emergence of (natural) language. In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track, Toulon,
France, 2017. Published online: https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2017/
conference.
[10] Satwik Kottur, José Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Natural language does not emerge
‘naturally’ in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 2962–2967, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 2017.
[11] Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to
communicate with sequences of symbols. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 2149–2159, Long
Beach, CA, 2017.
[12] Katrina Evtimova, Andrew Drozdov, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. Emergent communication in a multi-modal, multi-step referential game. In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track,
Vancouver, Canada, 2018. Published online: https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.
cc/2018/Conference.
[13] Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark. Emergence of
linguistic communication from referential games with symbolic and pixel input. In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track, Vancouver, Canada, 2018. Published online: https:
//openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2018/Conference.
[14] Edward Choi, Angeliki Lazaridou, and Nando de Freitas. Compositional obverter communication learning from raw visual input. In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track, Vancouver,
Canada, 2018. Published online: https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2018/
Conference.
[15] Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni. Anti-efficient
encoding in emergent communication. In Proceedings of NeurIPS, Vancouver, Canada, 2019.
Published online: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2019.
[16] Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Bouchacourt, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco
Baroni. Compositionality and generalization in emergent languages. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 4427–4442, virtual conference, 2020.
[17] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Lia-Ji Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of CVPR, pages 248–255, Miami Beach, FL, 2009.
[18] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan,
Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In David
Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV
2014, pages 740–755, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing.
[19] Diane Bouchacourt and Marco Baroni. How agents see things: On visual representations in an
emergent language game. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages 981–985, Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
[20] Jason Rolfe. Discrete variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track,
Toulon, France, 2017. Published online: https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/
2017/conference.
[21] Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation
learning. In Proceedings of NIPS, pages 6306–6315, Long Beach, CA, 2017.
11

[22] Ali Razavi, Aaron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images
with VQ-VAE-2. In Proceedings of NeurIPS, Vancouver, Canada, 2019. Published online:
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2019.
[23] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski,
and Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.14294, 2021.
[24] Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. In H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 9912–9924. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
[25] Debidatta Dwibedi, Yusuf Aytar, Jonathan Tompson, Pierre Sermanet, and Andrew Zisserman. With a little help from my friends: Nearest-neighbor contrastive learning of visual
representations. CoRR, abs/2104.14548, 2021.
[26] Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Selfsupervised learning via redundancy reduction. CoRR, abs/2103.03230, 2021.
[27] Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive
predictive coding. CoRR, abs/1807.03748, 2018.
[28] Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple Siamese representation learning. CoRR,
abs/2011.10566, 2020.
[29] Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyvärinen. Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation
principle for unnormalized statistical models. In Yee Whye Teh and Mike Titterington, editors,
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
volume 9 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 297–304, Chia Laguna Resort,
Sardinia, Italy, 13–15 May 2010. PMLR.
[30] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training
by reducing internal covariate shift. In Francis Bach and David Blei, editors, Proceedings of the
32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 448–456, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR.
[31] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax.
In Proceedings of ICLR Conference Track, Toulon, France, 2017. Published online: https:
//openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2017/conference.
[32] Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
relaxation of discrete random variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.
[33] Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep sparse rectifier neural networks. In
Proceedings of AISTATS, pages 315–323, Fort Lauderdale, FL, 2011.
[34] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 770–778, 2016.
[35] Philip Bachman, Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing mutual information across views. In Proceedings of NeurIPS, Vancouver, Canada, 2019.
Published online: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2019.
[36] Mang Ye, Xu Zhang, Pong Yuen, and Shih-Fu Chang. Unsupervised embedding learning via
invariant and spreading instance feature. In Proceedings of CVPR, pages 6210–6219, Long
Beach, CA, 2019.
[37] Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory F. Diamos, Erich Elsen, David
García, Boris Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, and Hao Wu.
Mixed precision training. CoRR, abs/1710.03740, 2017.
12

[38] Yang You, Igor Gitman, and Boris Ginsburg. Scaling SGD batch size to 32k for imagenet
training. CoRR, abs/1708.03888, 2017.
[39] Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross B. Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo
Kyrola, Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch SGD:
training imagenet in 1 hour. CoRR, abs/1706.02677, 2017.
[40] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with restarts. CoRR,
abs/1608.03983, 2016.
[41] Eugene Kharitonov, Roberto Dessì, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Bouchacourt, and Marco Baroni.
EGG: a toolkit for research on Emergence of lanGuage in Games. https://github.com/
facebookresearch/EGG, 2021.
[42] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision,
115(3):211–252, 2015.
[43] Christiane Fellbaum, editor. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1998.
[44] Junnan Li, Pan Zhou, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Prototypical contrastive learning of
unsupervised representations. In Proceedings of ICLR, Online event, 2021. Proceedings at:
https://openreview.net/group?id=ICLR.cc/2021/Conference.
[45] Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Jianxiong Xiao, Antonio Torralba, and Aude Oliva. Learning
deep features for scene recognition using Places database. In Proceedings of NIPS, Montreal,
Canada, 2014. Published online: https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2014.
[46] Priya Goyal, Quentin Duval, Jeremy Reizenstein, Matthew Leavitt, Min Xu, Benjamin
Lefaudeux, Mannat Singh, Vinicius Reis, Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
and Ishan Misra. VISSL. https://github.com/facebookresearch/vissl, 2021.
[47] Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. Natural language processing with Python:
analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2009.
[48] Robert Berwick and Noam Chomsky. Why Only Us: Language and Evolution. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2016.

13

